As early as 2001, researchers have proposed the use of a novel, hybrid engine
design for use in supersonic and hypersonic flight \cite{Macheret2001}. In some
ways similar to an earlier program \cite{Gurijanov1996}, it suggested that
magnetohydrodynamic (\acs{mhd}) accelerators were an enabling technology for
hypersonic transport. Briefly, a \acs{mhd} accelerator could be used to
simultaneously produce energy and slow the inlet airflow. This would allow the
use of a conventional turbojet engine at speeds well above its normal
operational range.

However, \acs{mhd} accelerators require an ionized fluid flow. Even at the high
altitudes associated with hypersonic flight, this is not easy to achieve.
Originally, Macheret suggested the use of electron beams, carefully tuned to
coincide with the peak in the ionization cross section in air. However, the use
of electron beams in the ionization of high pressure gases is accompanied by a
large number of technical issues, similar to those of some excimer lasers.
Therefore, in 2002, Macheret et al.\ proposed the use of a \acs{rpnd} to produce
an ``electron beam'' in situ \cite{Macheret2002} akin to the beams observed in
certain \acs{fiw} studies.

The use of a \acs{rpnd} is accompanied by a reduced ionization efficiency in
comparison to an electron beam. However, it reduces the some of the
implementation challenges and Macheret argued that it offered a more efficient
and stable option than breakdown with DC electric fields. Though the densities
of \acs{fiw}s in several air-related chemistries have been measured on several
occassions \cite{Anikin1998, Aleksandrov2007, Aleksandrov2008,
Starikovskaia2006}, similar studies do not appear to exist for \acs{rpnd}s in
air. Therefore, there is a need for electron density measurements to confirm
that \acs{rpnd}s are adequate for the \acs{mhd} accelerator requirements and to
quantify their ionization efficiency.

In addition, previous studies of \acs{fiw}s in air have observed fast gas
heating of molecular systems \cite{Popov2011}. Up to 40\% of the input energy
can be converted into translational energy through dissociation of oxygen and
quenching or electronically excited nitrogen states. As the \acs{rpnd} physics
are very similar to that of the \acs{fiw}, there is the possibility that it may
also cause fast gas heating. In combustion, this can play an important role in
the chemistry, flame holding, and ignition delay. More generally, gas heating
can impact material processing and ionization efficiency. As such, it is
important to develop reliable temperature diagnostics for \acs{rpnd}s in
molecular gases.

This appendix records the development of two diagnostics for an air \acs{rpnd}
at \acs{nasa} Glenn Research Center (\acs{grc}). Measurement of the electron
density was accomplished using millimeter-wave interferometry. Plasma
interferometry measures changes in the phase and amplitude of an electromagnetic
wave which has passed through the plasma \cite{Lieberman2005}. The phase shift
is proportional to the density of electrons while the change in amplitude is
related to the electron-neutral collision frequency. As with other wave-based
techniques, the density resulting from this approach is line integrated. The
translational temperature of the system was measured via

Translational temperatures were measured by analysis of the rotational spectra
associate with the second positive system of nitrogen. Rotational spectra result
from changes in the rotational quanta of a molecule. As the energy spacing of
the rotational levels is generally quite small (often on the order of $10^{-4}$
eV), inter-molecular collisions can easily redistribute them
\cite{Herzberg1950}. Provided enough collisions, the distribution of rotational
states should reflect the distribution of translational energy for the
molecules.

\section{Discharge Apparatus}

Experiments were conducted in a cylindrical vacuum chamber, reproduced in
figure~\ref{fig:nasachamber},
\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \setlength\fboxsep{0pt}
  \setlength\fboxrule{1.0pt}
  \fbox{\includegraphics{./chapters/nasa/figures/VF-69.jpg}}
  \caption{Vacuum chamber used in \acs{rpnd} experiments at the \acs{nasa}
    \acs{grc} along with an \acs{iccd} used for fast imaging.}
  \label{fig:nasachamber}
\end{figure}
with a volume of approximately 30 L. The chamber was evacuated by a Varian
TriScroll 300, scroll pump and the pressure was monitored by a capacitance
manometer. Before each experiment the chamber pressure was reduced to below 100
mTorr, after which the chamber was sealed from the pump by a bellows valve. The
chamber was then back-filled with ambient air until the pressure reached 20.0
Torr.

The discharge was sustained between two parallel cylindrical electrodes, 2.5 cm
in diameter and 0.625 cm in length. In the interferometry experiment, the
electrodes were mounted in a silicone-based dielectric epoxy, cast such that it
was flush with the faces of the electrodes. Optical emission experiments
eliminated the dielectric epoxy in favor of a machinable ceramic and slightly
different geometry, seen in figure~\ref{fig:electrodes}.
\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics{./chapters/nasa/figures/electrodes.pdf}
  \caption{The electrodes used in the \acs{rpnd} at \acs{nasa} \acs{grc}. The
    electrodes are made of copper with a ceramic sheath made of Mykroy.}
  \label{fig:electrodes}
\end{figure}
This choice was made as a result of damage observed to the epoxy molds. Plasma
breakdown appeared to be occurring at the interface of the mold and the
electrodes. The use of the Mykroy fitting allowed longer duration operation
necessary for the optical emissions measurements.

The power supply was built by FID (model FPG 60-100-MC4-S5) and supplied voltage
pulses of up to 60 kV at repetition rates from 6-100 kHz with pulsewidths of 5
ns. Unless otherwise stated, all measurements were made with the power supply
operating at 20 kHz using a Wavetek FG3C as the master clock.

Maintenance of the electrodes and other components of the discharge apparatus
required that the chamber volume regularly be brought up to atmospheric
pressure. When the discharge was initiated after the chamber was returned to the
20.0 Torr operating pressure, a pressure transient was observed. This transient
caused the chamber pressure to rise by about 2.0 Torr after several minutes of
operation, after which the pressure would remain relatively stable. This was
believed to be caused by the outgassing of the discharge apparatus surfaces.
Throughout operation, the pressure would continue to increase at a greatly
reduced rate, on the order of several tenths of a Torr per minute.

\section{Millimeter-Wave Interferometry}

Traditionally, plasma interferometry has been conducted with microwaves, as the
electron densities in processing plasmas cause readily observable phase shifts
at these wavelengths. However, results from similar \acs{rpnd}s
\cite{Starikovskaia2001} suggested that the electron densities could approach
$10^{13}$ cm$^{-3}$. Such densities exceed the cutoff wavelength of microwave
interferometers \cite{Lieberman2005}. As a result, it was necessary to use
millimeter-wave (\acs{mmw}) interferometry which uses much higher frequencies in
order to avoid this issue.

\subsection{Theory}

The theory underlying interferometry can be found in many plasma diagnostic
textbooks, however the majority of the treatments only concern plasmas in which
there are no neutral particles. In contrast, the work of Akhtar et al.
\cite{Akhtar2003} introduces a frictional force to the derivation which accounts
for the effects of neutral particles. Following this approach, the theory below
provides the necessary set of equations in order to determine the electron
density and collision frequency provided measurements of the \acs{mmw} phase
shift and change in amplitude.

The derivation begins with the motion of electron in an oscillating
electromagnetic field. The position of a charged particle in such a field can be
found from the non-relativistic Lorentz equation,
  \begin{equation}
    \bm{F} = q\left( \bm{E} + \bm{v} \times \bm{B} \right),
    \label{eqn:lorentz}
  \end{equation}
where $\bm{F}$ is the force on the particle, $q$ is its charge, $\bm{E}$ is the
electric field, $\bm{v}$ is the particle's velocity, and $\bm{B}$ is the
magnetic field. In the case of a weak electromagnetic field (such as in
interferometry) the magnetic field component can be assumed to be zero. Without
loss of generality, the equation may be reduced to a single dimension.
Afterward, the drag force which accounts for the neutral particle collisions can
be introduced. The acceleration of the electron can then be written as
  \begin{equation}
    \ddot{r} = -\frac{e E}{m} - \nu_\mathrm{eff} m_e \dot{r},
  \end{equation}
where $r$ is the position of the electron, $e$ is the elementary charge,
$\nu_\mathrm{eff}$ is the effective rate of momentum transfer, and $m_e$ is the
mass of the electron.

A sinusoidal electric field can be expressed as $E_0 e^{i\omega t}$ where
$E_0$ represents the peak field strength and $\omega$ is the angular frequency.
The form of $E$ suggests a sinusoidal solution such that $r \propto e^{i\omega
t}$. Solving the differential equation for $\dot{r}$ yields
    \begin{equation}
        \dot{r} = -\frac{eE}{m_e}\frac{\nu_\mathrm{eff} + i\omega}
                                      {\nu_\mathrm{eff}^2 + \omega^2}.
    \end{equation}
This drift velocity can be used to solve for the complex plasma conductivity
and subsequently the dielectric constant. Finally, the complex propagation
constant can be written,
    \begin{equation}
        \gamma = \alpha + i\beta,
    \end{equation}
where $\alpha$ is the responsible for the amplitude decay and $\beta$ is
responsible for the phase shift. These are given by Akhtar as
    \newcommand{\ts}{\frac{\omega_p^2}{\omega^2 + \nu_\mathrm{eff}^2}}
    \begin{align}
        \beta & = \frac{\omega}{c} \left\{ \frac{1}{2} \left(1 - \ts \right)
                  + \frac{1}{2} \left[ \left( 1 - \ts \right)^2
                  + \left( \ts \frac{\nu_\mathrm{eff}}{\omega} \right)^2
                  \right]^{1/2} \right\}^{1/2}, \\
        \alpha & = \frac{\omega}{c} \left\{ -\frac{1}{2} \left(1 - \ts \right)
                   + \frac{1}{2} \left[ \left( 1 - \ts \right)^2
                   + \left( \ts \frac{\nu_\mathrm{eff}}{\omega} \right)^2
                   \right]^{1/2} \right\}^{1/2}.
    \end{align}
The electron density and collision frequency may be solved for explicitly such that
    \begin{align}
        \nu_\mathrm{eff} & = 2 \frac{c^2}{\omega}\frac{\alpha\beta}{\xi}, \\
        n_e & = \frac{m_e\epsilon_0}{e^2}\xi
                \left(\omega^2+\nu_\mathrm{eff}^2\right), 
    \end{align}
where $\xi = 1 - (\beta^2-\alpha^2)c^2/\omega^2$. The values for $\alpha$ and
$\beta$ come from experimental measures of the phase shift and change in
amplitude,
    \begin{align}
        \Delta \phi &= \int_0^d \left( \beta_0 - \beta\right)dr, \qquad
        \textrm{and} \\
        \Delta A &= \int_0^d \left( \alpha_0 - \alpha \right)dr,
    \end{align}
where $\Delta \phi$ is the phase change, $\Delta A$ is the amplitude change, $d$
is the pathlength through the plasma, and $\alpha_0$ and $\beta_0$ are free
space propagation values. As any measurements are integrated over the pathlength
of the system, it is common eliminate any spatial dependence by solving for
pathlength-averaged values.

pathlength-averaged values.

\section{Experiment}
    The mmW interferometry was conducted using an HP 8510C network analyzer operating at 75 GHz. The network analyzer was managed by a Labview script and had a maximum sample rate of 5 Hz. Each sample required approximately 100 $\mu$s to complete. The horns used to transmit and receive the mmW were align by maximizing the amplitude of the transmitted signal without the plasma present. The pathlength of the wave through the plasma was assumed to be 2.5 cm, however this is likely an underestimate as a result of diffusion.

    The actual operating pressures ranged from 19.9-22.6 Torr. The \textsc{fid} power supply was set up for bipolar operation at $\pm$9 kV with one electrode pulsed negative and the other positive. A DC sustainer discharge, as described in \cite{Schneider2009a}, was used in several cases. The sustainer is simply a set of electrodes perpendicular to the discharge axis of the \textsc{pnd}. The sustainer electrodes are held at a potential difference close to, but less than the DC breakdown voltage. The intended effect is an increase in ionization efficiency and a reduced recombination rate.
\section{Results}
    \subsection{Time Evolution}
        The first goal was to evaluate how the plasma changed over long periods of operation. The lack of a circulating air flow suggested that the discharge might change significantly from one minute to the next. This has significant implications for measurements that require acquisitions on the same time scale. One such example is gated passive spectroscopy; the light emitted by the \textsc{pnd} is extremely dim for sub-nanosecond measurements, making it necessary to accumulate light from several hundred or thousand individual pulses. Depending on the duty factor of the imaging device, such a measurement may require tens of minutes.

        The evolution of the plasma was captured over a period of 30 minutes. Longer duration acquisitions were limited by electromagnetic interference (\textsc{emi}) from the \textsc{pnd}. In particular, the master clock was particularly susceptible to interference. Despite extensive efforts to provide adequate shielding to the clock and all signal cables, a large number of experiments were halted as a result of this interference.

        \begin{figure}
            \centering
            \includegraphics{./figures/densev.pdf}
            \caption{The evolution of the density (---) and the collision frequency (\raisebox{2.5pt}{${\scriptscriptstyle \centerdot \centerdot \centerdot}$}) in a \textsc{pnd} over a period of 30 minutes. These quantities reach their respective maximum and minimum after approximately five minutes, however these are not equilibrium values. The \textsc{pnd} continues to change over long durations.}\label{fig:densev}
        \end{figure}
        Figure \ref{fig:densev} shows a measurement of the density and collision frequency evolution over a period of thirty minutes for a \textsc{pnd} operating at 20 kHz, with applied voltages of $\pm$ 9 kV, and no DC sustainer. As hypothesized, there is an observable change in the average electron density on the order of minutes. It reaches a peak after five minutes, after which it shows a moderate decline. The collision frequency ranges from approximately 10-18 GHz. It reaches a minimum at five minutes, the same time that the electron density reaches its maximum, and subsequently rises. The actual average density ranged from approximately $2.25\times 10^{11}$ cm$^{-3}$ to $3.25\times 10^{11}$ cm$^{-3}$. The magnitude of the electron density is somewhat less than anticipated; other papers such as \cite{Aleksandrov2007}, \cite{Pancheshnyi1999}, and \cite{Macheret2006} state densities exceeding $10^{12}$ cm$^{-3}$. Separate experiments (not shown here) demonstrated similar electron densities and collision frequencies. However, the time for the system to reach its quasi-equilibrium varied and, in some cases, required 10 minutes.
        
        The observed increase in collision frequency was, perhaps, a result of increasing pressure and gas temperature in the chamber. Meanwhile, the change in electron density may be a result of a changing chemical composition. It is not immediately clear what mechanism is responsible for this, but it is well-known that electrons will readily attach to water molecules. As they are destroyed through dissociation, the attachment rate would decline and it would be reasonable to expect an increase in electron density.

    \subsection{DC Sustainer}
        Six separate experiments were run with the DC sustainer discharge on at approximately 750 V (current limited), and four experiments were run with the sustainer off (electrodes floating). Difficulties with \text{emi} prevented a more complete evaluation of the sustainer's effect. Therefore, an absolute statement on the influence of the DC sustainer is not possible. However, experiments without the DC sustainer exhibited consistently higher, but variable, densities.

        It is believed that the sustainer may have caused increased energy transfer to the excited states of atoms and molecules, but was ineffective at increasing the electron density. Indeed, the sustainer voltage was insufficient to produce a glow discharge independent of the high voltage pulses. As such, one may conclude that it will tend to extract more electrons than it produces. This being the case, a DC sustainer may be useful in situations requiring fast gas heating, but at the cost of a reduced ionization efficiency.

\section{Rotational Spectroscopy}

The approach used measured the rotational spectra of
a molecular system and used this information to infer the rotational
temperature. As a result of the close energy-spacing of the rotational levels,
this temperature is usually a good measure of the translational temperature of
the system \cite{Laux1993}. This technique is limited by the ability to detect
light from the transitions, and by the equilibration time of the translational
and rotational temperatures.

The measurement of rotational transitions is a common diagnostic for the
measurement of gas temperatures, particularly in the field of combustion.
Matching of the rotational spectra is typically accomplished with a computer
program such as Specair \cite{Laux2002} and LIFBASE \cite{Luque1999}. However, a
survey of the available programs revealed little documentation about the
calculation methods and none which provided the necessary flexibility how the
spectra were generated. This necessitated the development of a program to
automate the generation and matching of rotational spectra.
